《闻香识女人》（英语：Scent of a Woman）是一部于1992年上映的美国电影。电影叙述了一名私立高中的学生，为一位脾气暴躁的眼盲退休军官担任助手。由阿尔·帕西诺、克里斯·奥唐纳（Chris O'Donnell）、詹姆斯·瑞布霍恩（James Rebhorn）、菲利普·塞默·霍夫曼以及贾布瑞·安瓦尔主演。其中阿尔·帕西诺在多次与奥斯卡金像奖失之交臂后，终于凭借著此片中杰出演出夺得第65届奥斯卡最佳男主角奖。

---


| 英                       | 中                   |
| ----------------------- | ------------------- |
| **cover-up artist**     | 掩盖真相的人 / 善于掩盖丑闻的人   |
| snitch                  | 告密者、打小报告的人（强烈贬义）    |
| **crock of shit**       | 一派胡言 / 狗屁不通（非常粗俗）   |
| **watch your language** | 注意你的用词 / 注意你的言辞     |
| **facing the fire**     | 直面惩罚/承担后果           |
| **sham**                | 骗局                  |
| **non-negotiable**      | 不可妥协的               |
| **out of order**        | 行为越界 / 违反秩序（正式场合用语） |
| **integrity**           | 正值                  |
| **prosthetic**          | 假肢                  |

---

**Trask:** Mr. Sims, you are a cover-up artist and you are a liar.  
**Slade:** But not a snitch!  
**Trask:** Excuse me?  
**Slade:** No, I don't think I will. This is such a crock of shit.  
**Trask:** Mr. Slade, you will watch your language. You are at the Baird School now, not a barracks. Mr. Sims, I will give you one final opportunity to speak up.  
**Slade:** Mr. Sims doesn't want it. He doesn't need to labeled, "...still worthy of being a 'Baird Man.'" What the hell is that? What is your motto here? "Boys, inform on your classmates, save your hide. Anything short of that we're gonna burn you at the stake?" Well, gentlemen. When the shit hits the fan, some guys run and some guys stay. Here's Charlie--facing the fire, and there's George--hiding in big Daddy's pocket. And what are you doin'? You're gonna reward George, and destroy Charlie.  
**Trask:** Are you finished, Mr. Slade?  
**Slade:** No, I'm just gettin' warmed up. Now I don't know who went to this place--William Howard Taft, William Jennings Bryan, William Tell--whoever. Their spirit is dead; if they ever had one, it's gone. You're building a rat ship here. A vessel for sea going snitches. And if you think you're preparing these minnows, for manhood you better think again. Because I say you are killing the very spirit this institution proclaims it instills. What a sham! What kind of show you guys puttin' on here today? I mean, the only class in this act is sittin' next to me. And I say, this boy's soul is intact. It's non-negotiable. You know how I know? Because someone here--I'm not gonna say who--offered to buy it. Only Charlie here wasn't selling.  
**Trask:** Sir, you are out of order!  
**Slade:** Out of order, I'll show you out of order! You don't know what out of order is, Mr.Trask! I'd show you but I'm too old, I'm too tired, and I'm too fuckin' blind. If I were the man I was five years ago I'd take a flame-thrower to this place!! Out of order, who the hell do you think you're talking to? I've been around, you know? There was a time I could see. And I have seen, boys like these, younger than these, their arms torn out, their legs ripped off. But there is nothin' like the sight of an amputated spirit, there is no prosthetic for that. You think you're merely sending this splendid foot-soldier back home to Oregon with his tail between his legs, but I say that you are executing his soul! And why? Because he's not a Baird man. Baird men, you hurt this boy, you're going to be Baird Bums, the lot of ya. And Harry, Jimmy, Trent, wherever you are out there, fuck you too.  
**Trask:** Stand down Mr. Slade!  
**Slade:** I'm not finished! Now as I came in here, I heard those words...cradle of leadership. Well, when the bough breaks, the cradle will fall. And it has fallen here, it has fallen! Makers of men, creators of leaders, be careful what kind of leaders you're producing here. I don't know if Charlie's silence here today is right or wrong; I'm no judge or jury. But I can tell you this: he won't sell anybody out to buy his future! And that my friends is called integrity, that's called courage. Now that's the stuff leaders should be made of. (pause) Now I have come to the crossroads in my life. I always knew what the right path was. Without exception, I knew. But I never took it, you know why? It was too damn hard. Now here's Charlie; he's come to the crossroads. He has chosen a path, it's the right path. It's a path made of principle, that leads to character. Let him continue on his journey. You hold this boy's future in your hands, committee! It's a valuable future. Believe me! Don't destroy...protect it...embrace it. It's gonna make you proud some day...I promise you.

